README.md, before:

# Transactions API

RESTful service that stores financial transactions in memory and exposes queries over them.

## Architecture

The project follows **Hexagonal Architecture** (Ports & Adapters):

```
src/main/java/org/example/transactionsapi/
├── domain/
│   ├── model/
│   │   ├── Transaction.java                       # Immutable domain entity (record)
│   │   └── TransactionNotFoundException.java      # Domain exception
│   ├── port/
│   │   ├── in/                                    # Driving ports (use-case interfaces)
│   │   │   ├── CreateTransactionUseCase.java
│   │   │   ├── UpsertTransactionUseCase.java
│   │   │   ├── GetTransactionByIdUseCase.java
│   │   │   ├── GetTransactionsByTypeUseCase.java
│   │   │   └── GetTransactionSumUseCase.java
│   │   └── out/                                   # Driven port (repository interface)
│   │       └── TransactionRepository.java
│   └── service/
│       └── TransactionService.java                # Pure domain logic, no framework deps
├── adapter/
│   ├── in/web/
│   │   ├── TransactionController.java             # REST controller
│   │   ├── GlobalExceptionHandler.java            # HTTP error mapping
│   │   └── dto/                                   # Request/response DTOs
│   └── out/persistence/
│       └── InMemoryTransactionRepository.java     # In-memory implementation
├── BeanConfiguration.java                         # Spring wiring (domain ↔ adapter)
└── TransactionsApiApplication.java
```

**To replace the in-memory storage** with any database, simply implement `TransactionRepository` and register the new bean — zero changes to domain or web code.

## API

| Method | Path | Description |
|--------|------|-------------|
| `POST` | `/transactions` | Create a transaction (id auto-generated, returned in response) |
| `PUT`  | `/transactions/{id}` | Idempotent upsert (id in path) |
| `GET`  | `/transactions/{id}` | Retrieve a transaction by id |
| `GET`  | `/transactions/types/{type}` | List all transaction ids for a type |
| `GET`  | `/transactions/sum/{id}` | Transitive sum of a transaction and its descendants |

---

### `POST /transactions`
Creates a new transaction. The id is auto-generated by the server. Returns `201 Created`.

**Body**
```json
{ "amount": 5000, "type": "cars", "parent_id": 9 }
```
`parent_id` is optional.

**Response** `201`
```json
{ "id": 1 }
```

---

### `PUT /transactions/{transaction_id}`
Idempotent upsert — creates or fully replaces the transaction with the given id. Returns `200 OK`.

**Body**
```json
{ "amount": 5000, "type": "cars", "parent_id": 9 }
```
`parent_id` is optional.

**Response** `200`
```json
{ "status": "ok" }
```

---

### `GET /transactions/{transaction_id}`
Returns the full details of a single transaction. Returns `404` if not found.

**Response** `200`
```json
{ "id": 10, "amount": 5000.0, "type": "cars" }
```
`parent_id` is included only when present.

---

### `GET /transactions/types/{type}`
Returns a list of all transaction ids for the given type.

**Response** `200`
```json
[10, 12]
```

---

### `GET /transactions/sum/{transaction_id}`
Returns the sum of amounts for the transaction and all its transitive descendants. Returns `404` if not found.

**Response** `200`
```json
{ "sum": 20000.0 }
```

---

### Example
```
POST /transactions  { "amount": 5000,  "type": "cars" }              →  { "id": 1 }
POST /transactions  { "amount": 10000, "type": "shopping", "parent_id": 1 }  →  { "id": 2 }
POST /transactions  { "amount": 5000,  "type": "shopping", "parent_id": 2 }  →  { "id": 3 }

GET /transactions/1            →  { "id": 1, "amount": 5000.0, "type": "cars" }
GET /transactions/types/cars   →  [1]
GET /transactions/sum/1        →  { "sum": 20000.0 }
GET /transactions/sum/2        →  { "sum": 15000.0 }
```

## Running locally

```bash
./gradlew bootRun
```

## Tests

```bash
./gradlew test
```

## Docker

```bash
# Build
docker build -t transactions-api .

# Run
docker run -p 8080:8080 transactions-api
```

Commit message:

fix: PUT now requires existing id, preventing collision with auto-generated POST ids
UpsertTransactionUseCase renamed to UpdateTransactionUseCase. The service
checks existence before saving and throws TransactionNotFoundException if
the id is not found, causing the controller to return 404.

POST via CreateTransactionUseCase remains the only way to create new
transactions, with ids exclusively owned by the AtomicLong sequence.

README.md, after:

# Transactions API

RESTful service that stores financial transactions in memory and exposes queries over them.

## Architecture

The project follows **Hexagonal Architecture** (Ports & Adapters):

```
src/main/java/org/example/transactionsapi/
├── domain/
│   ├── model/
│   │   ├── Transaction.java                       # Immutable domain entity (record)
│   │   └── TransactionNotFoundException.java      # Domain exception
│   ├── port/
│   │   ├── in/                                    # Driving ports (use-case interfaces)
│   │   │   ├── CreateTransactionUseCase.java
│   │   │   ├── UpdateTransactionUseCase.java
│   │   │   ├── GetTransactionByIdUseCase.java
│   │   │   ├── GetTransactionsByTypeUseCase.java
│   │   │   └── GetTransactionSumUseCase.java
│   │   └── out/                                   # Driven port (repository interface)
│   │       └── TransactionRepository.java
│   └── service/
│       └── TransactionService.java                # Pure domain logic, no framework deps
├── adapter/
│   ├── in/web/
│   │   ├── TransactionController.java             # REST controller
│   │   ├── GlobalExceptionHandler.java            # HTTP error mapping
│   │   └── dto/                                   # Request/response DTOs
│   └── out/persistence/
│       └── InMemoryTransactionRepository.java     # In-memory implementation
├── BeanConfiguration.java                         # Spring wiring (domain ↔ adapter)
└── TransactionsApiApplication.java
```

**To replace the in-memory storage** with any database, simply implement `TransactionRepository` and register the new bean — zero changes to domain or web code.

## API

| Method | Path | Description |
|--------|------|-------------|
| `POST` | `/transactions` | Create a transaction (id auto-generated, returned in response) |
| `PUT`  | `/transactions/{id}` | Update an existing transaction (404 if not found) |
| `GET`  | `/transactions/{id}` | Retrieve a transaction by id |
| `GET`  | `/transactions/types/{type}` | List all transaction ids for a type |
| `GET`  | `/transactions/sum/{id}` | Transitive sum of a transaction and its descendants |

---

### `POST /transactions`
Creates a new transaction. The id is auto-generated by the server. Returns `201 Created`.

**Body**
```json
{ "amount": 5000, "type": "cars", "parent_id": 9 }
```
`parent_id` is optional.

**Response** `201`
```json
{ "id": 1 }
```

---

### `PUT /transactions/{transaction_id}`
Updates an existing transaction. Returns `404` if the id does not exist.

**Body**
```json
{ "amount": 5000, "type": "cars", "parent_id": 9 }
```
`parent_id` is optional.

**Response** `200`
```json
{ "status": "ok" }
```

---

### `GET /transactions/{transaction_id}`
Returns the full details of a single transaction. Returns `404` if not found.

**Response** `200`
```json
{ "id": 10, "amount": 5000.0, "type": "cars" }
```
`parent_id` is included only when present.

---

### `GET /transactions/types/{type}`
Returns a list of all transaction ids for the given type.

**Response** `200`
```json
[10, 12]
```

---

### `GET /transactions/sum/{transaction_id}`
Returns the sum of amounts for the transaction and all its transitive descendants. Returns `404` if not found.

**Response** `200`
```json
{ "sum": 20000.0 }
```

---

### Example
```
POST /transactions  { "amount": 5000,  "type": "cars" }              →  { "id": 1 }
POST /transactions  { "amount": 10000, "type": "shopping", "parent_id": 1 }  →  { "id": 2 }
POST /transactions  { "amount": 5000,  "type": "shopping", "parent_id": 2 }  →  { "id": 3 }

GET /transactions/1            →  { "id": 1, "amount": 5000.0, "type": "cars" }
GET /transactions/types/cars   →  [1]
GET /transactions/sum/1        →  { "sum": 20000.0 }
GET /transactions/sum/2        →  { "sum": 15000.0 }
```

## Running locally

```bash
./gradlew bootRun
```

## Tests

```bash
./gradlew test
```

## Docker

```bash
# Build
docker build -t transactions-api .

# Run
docker run -p 8080:8080 transactions-api
```
